### Personal interests

In my spare time, I currently do a few things: reading, writing, music, some wood working, and I can probably build a house from scratch though I never tried. I also had periods of elaborate cooking, though now I am mostly baking my own bread every day -- French baguettes straight from the oven are irresistible! I owe this bread making interest to our friend Joseph who is an accomplished musician, baker, writer, and photographer.

Throughout my life I have been practicing sports, but I am not looking as superman. I have no interest in watching sports. I went to a school where 6 hours of sport each week was mandatory (3 times 2 hours). It also required students to learn a new sport every semester, under the direction of particularly knowledgeable teachers. I have practiced various ball sports (soccer, rubgy, handball, basketball, water polo, tennis, babmington), running (100m, 500m, relay, hurdling, long distance), throwing (hammer, javelin, disk, weight), jumping (high jump, long jump, pole vault), swiming (crawl, butterfly, breaststroke, diving), gymanstic (horizontal bar, parallel bar, rings, rope climbing). I was a avid fencer (all weapons) for several years. I got from this tremendous training an appreciation for all of these sports, a clear understanding that I was really poor at some and quite good at others, and tons of fun memory! I still do some physical activity to keep in shape, but nothing exotic.

If you want to laugh at my expenses: I jumped far lower at the pole vault then at the high jump! The only way I can jump as high is to throw away the pole before jumping!

My non-professional interests have been changing over the years, depending to where I lived, who I hanged out with, and geo-political events. Some constants have been international, domestic and military affaires. I used to listen a lot of music and play a fair amount of piano. I learned the clarinet for a few years, and played the organ. I also wrote some music, stopped for several decades, and went back to it in 2020. I was at some point very knowledgeable in Soviet movies because tickets at the Soviet sponsored cinema in Paris were very cheap! 

I also read a fair amount on the following topics: architecture and design (though I am not good at drawing), and sustainability.